docs/source/how-to-run.rst, before:

How to Run DomHMM
=================

This section is about how to use DomHMM and how to elaborate on results.

.. note::
    In project's ``/example`` directory, you can find real life usage of DomHMM.

Running DomHMM
--------------

DomHMM's main class is ``PropertyCalculation``. In a basic example it is initialized as

.. code-block::

    model = domhmm.PropertyCalculation(universe_or_atomgroup=universe,
                                       leaflet_kwargs=leaflet_kwargs,
                                       membrane_select=membrane_select,
                                       leaflet_select="auto",
                                       heads=heads,
                                       sterol_heads=sterol_heads,
                                       sterol_tails=sterol_tails,
                                       tails=tails)

Then it can be run as

.. code-block::

    model.run(start=start_frame, end=end_frame, step=step)


Main Parameters
----------------

Let's dive into each parameter's details.

* In initialization process, ``universe_or_atomgroup`` parameter stands for MDAnalysis universe. It contains your simulation's trajectory and tpr file. It can be created as

.. code-block::

    path2xtc = "YOUR_XTC_FILE.xtc"
    path2tpr = "YOUR_TPR_FILE.tpr"
    universe = mda.Universe(path2tpr, path2xtc)

* ``leaflet_kwargs`` parameter stands for MDAnalysis ``LeafletFinder`` function's arguments. It is used to determine each leaflets residues. ``leaflet_kwargs`` requires head groups of lipids but not sterols.

.. code-block::

    # An example where all lipids head group is PO4
    leaflet_kwargs={"select": "name PO4", "pbc": True}

* ``membrane_select`` argument is for atom group selection of universe. It is useful for simulations that are contain non-membrane residues/molecules inside. If universe contains only membrane elements parameter can be leave in default option which is ``all``

.. code-block::

    # An example where simulation contains DPPC and DIPC lipids, and CHOL sterol
    membrane_select = "resname DPPC DIPC CHOL"

* ``leaflet_select`` argument is selection options for lipids which can be list of atom groups, list of string queries or automatically finding via LeafletFinder.

.. code-block::

    # List of atom groups
    lower_leaflet = universe.select_atoms("lower leaflet lipids query")
    upper_leaflet = universe.select_atoms("upper leaflet lipids query")
    leaflet_select = [lower_leaflet, upper_leaflet]
    # List of query strings
    leaflet_select = ["lower leaflet lipids query", "upper leaflet lipids query"]
    # Leave leaflet detection to DomHMM via LeafletFinder
    leaflet_select = "auto"

* ``heads`` parameter requires lipids head groups. For atomistic simulations, head molecules' center atom can be entered.

.. code-block::

    heads = {"DPPC": "PO4", "DIPC": "PO4"}

* ``sterol_heads`` parameter requires sterol head groups. For atomistic simulations, head molecules' center atom can be entered.

.. code-block::

    # Martini Cholestrol example
    sterol_heads = {"CHOL": "ROH"}
    # Atomistic Cholestrol example
    sterol_heads = {"CHL1": "O3"}

* ``sterol_tails`` parameter requires sterol tail groups. It should be considered that each tail should be entered in same order for each lipids.

.. code-block::

    # Martini Cholestrol example while ROH head as first element and C1 start of tail as second element
    sterol_tails = {"CHOL": ["ROH", "C1"]}
    # Atomistic Cholestrol example while O3 head as first element and C20 start of tail as second element
    sterol_tails = {"CHL1": ["O3", "C20"]}

* ``tails`` parameter requires lipids tail groups. It should be considered that each tail should be entered in same order for each lipids.

.. code-block::

    # Example of tails in order of {"Lipid_1":[[Acyl_Chain_1],[Acyl_Chain_2]], "Lipid_2":[[Acyl_Chain_1],[Acyl_Chain_2]]}
    tails = {"DPPC": [["C1B", "C2B", "C3B", "C4B"], ["C1A", "C2A", "C3A", "C4A"]],
                 "DIPC": [["C1B", "D2B", "D3B", "C4B"], ["C1A", "D2A", "D3A", "C4A"]]}


* For run option, you can have ``start``, ``stop`` and ``step`` options. This options arrange which frame to start, stop. You can also set model to be trained for each *X* frame by setting ``step=X``.

.. code-block::

    # An example where DomHMM model training starts from 5th frame and ends in 1000th frame while taking each 5th step. First three frames will be 5th, 10th and 15th frames.
    model.run(start=5, stop=1000, step=5)

.. warning::
    If detailed post analysis will be conducted on result such as usage of ``Getis_Ord`` results, input order of lipids and sterols should be in same order as in simulation. If simulation lipids are in order of ``DPPC, DIPC, CHOL`` with respect to residue ids, keys of ``heads``, ``tails``, ``sterol_heads``, and ``sterol_tails`` should be in same order just like in this example.

.. note::

    Since DomHMM uses Gaussian Mixture Model and Gaussian-based Hidden Markov Model, it is suggested to not use too short or too long simulations. Short simulations may not create a sensible results and long one would be take too much time to train model. In our examples, we used simulations that contains around 2000 frames and model run is finished around 25-30 minutes.

Optional Parameters
-------------------

* ``frac``

Fraction of box length in x and y outside the unit cell considered for area per lipid calculation by Voronoi. It is an optimization process parameter which is set to 0.5 as default.

* ``p_value``

Probability value that is used for z-score calculation. It is a determination percentage for domain identification with getis-ord statistic. In default, it is set to 0.05 or %5.

* ``result_plot``

Plotting option for debugging. While enabled, DomHMM will print Hidden Markov model iterations result, prediction results, Getis-Ord statistic results and clustering result of three frame.

* ``verbose``

Verbose option for debugging. Although, DomHMM doesn't print middle values, it shows which steps are done and shows middle step plots which may give clues about succession of model.


* ``gmm_kwargs``

Parameter option for Gaussian Mixture Model training. An example of it is

.. code-block::

    gmm_kwargs = {"tol": 1E-4, "init_params": 'k-means++', "verbose": 0,
                      "max_iter": 10000, "n_init": 20,
                      "warm_start": False, "covariance_type": "full"}

* ``hmm_kwargs``

Parameter option for Gaussian-based Hidden Markov Model training. An example of it is

.. code-block::

    hmm_kwargs = {"verbose": False, "tol": 1E-4, "n_iter": 1000,
                      "algorithm": "viterbi", "covariance_type": "full",
                      "init_params": "st", "params": "stmc"}

* ``trained_hmms``

Parameter option for reusing past DomHMM HMM models. If there are several analysis will be conducted with slightly difference membrane simulations or with different parameter options, first analysis HMM model can be reusable with this parameter.

.. code-block::

    model.run()
    with open(f'hmm_model_dump.pickle', 'wb') as file:
        pickle.dump(model.results["HMM"], file)
    ...
    with open(f'hmm_model_dump.pickle', 'rb') as file:
        reuse_hmm_model = pickle.load(file)
    model_2 = domhmm.PropertyCalculation( ... ,
                                         trained_hmms=reuse_hmm_models)

We encourage to check :doc:`tips` section that may contain useful information for your progress.

Commit message:

add example scripts and documentation details for tmd protein parameter

docs/source/how-to-run.rst, after:

How to Run DomHMM
=================

This section is about how to use DomHMM and how to elaborate on results.

.. note::
    In project's ``/example`` directory, you can find real life usage of DomHMM.

Running DomHMM
--------------

DomHMM's main class is ``PropertyCalculation``. In a basic example it is initialized as

.. code-block::

    model = domhmm.PropertyCalculation(universe_or_atomgroup=universe,
                                       leaflet_kwargs=leaflet_kwargs,
                                       membrane_select=membrane_select,
                                       leaflet_select="auto",
                                       heads=heads,
                                       sterol_heads=sterol_heads,
                                       sterol_tails=sterol_tails,
                                       tails=tails)

Then it can be run as

.. code-block::

    model.run(start=start_frame, end=end_frame, step=step)


Main Parameters
----------------

Let's dive into each parameter's details.

* In initialization process, ``universe_or_atomgroup`` parameter stands for MDAnalysis universe. It contains your simulation's trajectory and tpr file. It can be created as

.. code-block::

    path2xtc = "YOUR_XTC_FILE.xtc"
    path2tpr = "YOUR_TPR_FILE.tpr"
    universe = mda.Universe(path2tpr, path2xtc)

* ``leaflet_kwargs`` parameter stands for MDAnalysis ``LeafletFinder`` function's arguments. It is used to determine each leaflets residues. ``leaflet_kwargs`` requires head groups of lipids but not sterols.

.. code-block::

    # An example where all lipids head group is PO4
    leaflet_kwargs={"select": "name PO4", "pbc": True}

* ``membrane_select`` argument is for atom group selection of universe. It is useful for simulations that are contain non-membrane residues/molecules inside. If universe contains only membrane elements parameter can be leave in default option which is ``all``

.. code-block::

    # An example where simulation contains DPPC and DIPC lipids, and CHOL sterol
    membrane_select = "resname DPPC DIPC CHOL"

* ``leaflet_select`` argument is selection options for lipids which can be list of atom groups, list of string queries or automatically finding via LeafletFinder.

.. code-block::

    # List of atom groups
    lower_leaflet = universe.select_atoms("lower leaflet lipids query")
    upper_leaflet = universe.select_atoms("upper leaflet lipids query")
    leaflet_select = [lower_leaflet, upper_leaflet]
    # List of query strings
    leaflet_select = ["lower leaflet lipids query", "upper leaflet lipids query"]
    # Leave leaflet detection to DomHMM via LeafletFinder
    leaflet_select = "auto"

* ``heads`` parameter requires lipids head groups. For atomistic simulations, head molecules' center atom can be entered.

.. code-block::

    heads = {"DPPC": "PO4", "DIPC": "PO4"}

* ``sterol_heads`` parameter requires sterol head groups. For atomistic simulations, head molecules' center atom can be entered.

.. code-block::

    # Martini Cholestrol example
    sterol_heads = {"CHOL": "ROH"}
    # Atomistic Cholestrol example
    sterol_heads = {"CHL1": "O3"}

* ``sterol_tails`` parameter requires sterol tail groups. It should be considered that each tail should be entered in same order for each lipids.

.. code-block::

    # Martini Cholestrol example while ROH head as first element and C1 start of tail as second element
    sterol_tails = {"CHOL": ["ROH", "C1"]}
    # Atomistic Cholestrol example while O3 head as first element and C20 start of tail as second element
    sterol_tails = {"CHL1": ["O3", "C20"]}

* ``tails`` parameter requires lipids tail groups. It should be considered that each tail should be entered in same order for each lipids.

.. code-block::

    # Example of tails in order of {"Lipid_1":[[Acyl_Chain_1],[Acyl_Chain_2]], "Lipid_2":[[Acyl_Chain_1],[Acyl_Chain_2]]}
    tails = {"DPPC": [["C1B", "C2B", "C3B", "C4B"], ["C1A", "C2A", "C3A", "C4A"]],
                 "DIPC": [["C1B", "D2B", "D3B", "C4B"], ["C1A", "D2A", "D3A", "C4A"]]}


* For run option, you can have ``start``, ``stop`` and ``step`` options. This options arrange which frame to start, stop. You can also set model to be trained for each *X* frame by setting ``step=X``.

.. code-block::

    # An example where DomHMM model training starts from 5th frame and ends in 1000th frame while taking each 5th step. First three frames will be 5th, 10th and 15th frames.
    model.run(start=5, stop=1000, step=5)

.. warning::
    If detailed post analysis will be conducted on result such as usage of ``Getis_Ord`` results, input order of lipids and sterols should be in same order as in simulation. If simulation lipids are in order of ``DPPC, DIPC, CHOL`` with respect to residue ids, keys of ``heads``, ``tails``, ``sterol_heads``, and ``sterol_tails`` should be in same order just like in this example.

.. note::

    Since DomHMM uses Gaussian Mixture Model and Gaussian-based Hidden Markov Model, it is suggested to not use too short or too long simulations. Short simulations may not create a sensible results and long one would be take too much time to train model. In our examples, we used simulations that contains around 2000 frames and model run is finished around 25-30 minutes.

Optional Parameters
-------------------

* ``frac``

Fraction of box length in x and y outside the unit cell considered for area per lipid calculation by Voronoi. It is an optimization process parameter which is set to 0.5 as default.

* ``p_value``

Probability value that is used for z-score calculation. It is a determination percentage for domain identification with getis-ord statistic. In default, it is set to 0.05 or %5.

* ``result_plot``

Plotting option for debugging. While enabled, DomHMM will print Hidden Markov model iterations result, prediction results, Getis-Ord statistic results and clustering result of three frame.

* ``verbose``

Verbose option for debugging. Although, DomHMM doesn't print middle values, it shows which steps are done and shows middle step plots which may give clues about succession of model.


* ``gmm_kwargs``

Parameter option for Gaussian Mixture Model training. An example of it is

.. code-block::

    gmm_kwargs = {"tol": 1E-4, "init_params": 'k-means++', "verbose": 0,
                      "max_iter": 10000, "n_init": 20,
                      "warm_start": False, "covariance_type": "full"}

* ``hmm_kwargs``

Parameter option for Gaussian-based Hidden Markov Model training. An example of it is

.. code-block::

    hmm_kwargs = {"verbose": False, "tol": 1E-4, "n_iter": 1000,
                      "algorithm": "viterbi", "covariance_type": "full",
                      "init_params": "st", "params": "stmc"}

* ``trained_hmms``

Parameter option for reusing past DomHMM HMM models. If there are several analysis will be conducted with slightly difference membrane simulations or with different parameter options, first analysis HMM model can be reusable with this parameter.

.. code-block::

    model.run()
    with open(f'hmm_model_dump.pickle', 'wb') as file:
        pickle.dump(model.results["HMM"], file)
    ...
    with open(f'hmm_model_dump.pickle', 'rb') as file:
        reuse_hmm_model = pickle.load(file)
    model_2 = domhmm.PropertyCalculation( ... ,
                                         trained_hmms=reuse_hmm_models)

* ``tmd_protein_list``

Transmembrane domain (tmd) protein list to include area per lipid calculation. Since tmd proteins are take up space in upper, lower or both leaflets, three backbone atoms of protein for each leaflet should be included as in this parameter to increase success of identification.

.. code-block::

    # Selecting three backbone atoms that is touching to upper leaflet
    upBB = uni.select_atoms('name BB')[0:3]
    # Selecting three backbone atoms that is touching to lower leaflet
    loBB = uni.select_atoms('name BB')[-3:]
    # List can be expended with multiple dictionary objects as in more than one tmd protein scenarios.
    tmd_protein_list = [{"0": upBB, "1": loBB}]

We encourage to check :doc:`tips` section that may contain useful information for your progress.
